The authors created **Maize Cobs: A Dataset for DeepCob Analysis** to facilitate the study of maize cob image segmentation and phenotyping using classical image segmentation and deep learning methods. The dataset comprises a large collection of native maize landrace diversity images from Peru, exhibiting variations in the size, shape, and color of maize cobs.

High-throughput precision phenotyping is gaining importance in plant research, breeding, and crop production. However, phenotyping certain traits remains labor-intensive or technically challenging, posing a bottleneck in plant breeding and limiting progress in understanding genotype-phenotype relationships. To address this, phenomics platforms integrating high-throughput automated phenotyping and analysis software have been developed. Automated analysis of phenotypic data from these platforms is crucial to derive meaningful information for biological quantification.

Maize cobs are essential components of crop yield, with their size and shape significantly influencing total yield. They are potentially valuable traits for selection in breeding programs and for characterizing native diversity of crop plants to aid conservation and utilize them as genetic resources. The diversity of maize landraces, originating from South-Central Mexico around 9,000 years ago, offers a unique pool of genetic and phenotypic variation threatened by genetic erosion. Understanding this variation is crucial for identifying valuable genetic resources and developing targeted conservation strategies.

The dataset used in the study consists of 2,484 genebank accessions of 24 Peruvian maize landraces, representing diverse eco-geographical environments. The accessions were photographed during their genebank registration, resulting in 1,830 original (*ImgOld*) and 1,619 new (*ImgNew*) images, totaling 3,449 images. To achieve maximum diversity in image properties, subsets of training image data (200 or 1,000 images) were randomly selected from the ImgOld and ImgNew datasets consequently and divided into training and validation sets.

For updating image segmentation models and evaluating their robustness, two additional datasets were used. The *ImgCross* dataset contains images of maize cobs and spindles derived from a cross of Peruvian landraces with a synthetic population generated from European elite breeding material, reflecting genetic segregation in the F2 generation. The *ImgDiv* dataset was obtained from publicly available South American maize genebank catalogs and special collections available as downloadable figures on the internet, exhibiting diverse image properties. 

Note, that *ImgDiv* is not presented in DatasetNinja because corresponding images are not provided in the original dataset.
